To sing a song that oldwas sung,
From ashes ancient Goweris come;
Assuming man'sinfirmities,
To glad your ear, andplease your eyes.
It hath been sung atfestivals,
On ember-eves andholy days;
And lords and ladies intheir lives
Have read it forrestoratives:
The purchase is to makemen glorious;
Et bonum quo antiquius, eomelius.
If you, born in theselatter times,
When wit's more ripe,accept my rhymes.
And that to hear an oldman sing
May to your wishespleasure bring
I life would wish, andthat I might
Waste it for you, liketaper-light.
This Antioch, then,Antiochus the Great
Built up, this city, forhis chiefest seat:
The fairest in all Syria,
I tell you what mineauthors say:
This king unto him took afere,
Who died and left a femaleheir,
So buxom, blithe, and fullof face,
As heaven had lent her allhis grace;
With whom the fatherliking took,
And her to incest didprovoke:
Bad child; worse father!to entice his own
To evil should be done bynone:
But custom what they didbegin
Was with long use accountno sin.
The beauty of this sinfuldame
Made many princes thitherframe,
To seek her as abed-fellow,
In marriage-pleasuresplay-fellow:
Which to prevent he made alaw,
To keep her still, and menin awe,
That whoso ask'd her forhis wife,
His riddle told not, losthis life:
So for her many a wightdid die,
As yon grim looks dotestify.
What now ensues, to thejudgment of your eye
I give, my cause who bestcan justify.
Young prince of Tyre, youhave at large received
The danger of the task youundertake.
I have, Antiochus, and,with a soul
Embolden'd with the gloryof her praise,
Think death no hazard inthis enterprise.
Bring in our daughter,clothed like a bride,
For the embracements evenof Jove himself;
At whose conception, tillLucina reign'd,
Nature this dowry gave, toglad her presence,
The senate-house ofplanets all did sit,
To knit in her their bestperfections.
(♪ Music)
See where she comes,apparell'd like the spring,
Graces her subjects, andher thoughts the king
Of every virtue givesrenown to men!
Her face the book ofpraises, where is read
Nothing but curiouspleasures, as from thence
Sorrow were ever razed andtesty wrath
Could never be her mildcompanion.
You gods that made me man,and sway in love,
That have inflamed desirein my breast
To taste the fruit of yoncelestial tree,
Or die in the adventure,be my helps,
As I am son and servant toyour will,
To compass such aboundless happiness!
Prince Pericles,--
That would be son to greatAntiochus.
Before thee stands thisfair Hesperides,
With golden fruit, yetdangerous to be touch'd;
For death-like dragonshere affright thee hard:
Her face, like heaven,enticeth thee to view
Her countless glory, whichdesert must gain;
And which, without desert,because thine eye
Presumes to reach, all thywhole heap must die.
Yon sometimes famousprinces, like thyself,
Drawn by report,adventurous by desire,
Tell thee, with speechlesstongues and semblance pale,
That without covering,save yon field of stars,
Here they stand martyrs,slain in Cupid's wars;
And with dead cheeksadvise thee to desist
For going on death's net,whom none resist.
Antiochus, I thank thee,who hath taught
My frail mortality to knowitself,
And by those fearfulobjects to prepare
This body, like to them,to what I must;
For death remember'dshould be like a mirror,
Who tells us life's butbreath, to trust it error.
I'll make my will then,and, as sick men do
Who know the world, seeheaven, but, feeling woe,
Gripe not at earthly joysas erst they did;
So I bequeath a happypeace to you
And all good men, as everyprince should do;
My riches to the earthfrom whence they came;
But my unspotted fire oflove to you.
Thus ready for the way oflife or death,
I wait the sharpest blow,Antiochus.
Scorning advice, read theconclusion then:
Which read and notexpounded, 'tis decreed,
As these before thee thouthyself shalt bleed.
Of all say'd yet, maystthou prove prosperous!
Of all say'd yet, I wishthee happiness!
Like a bold champion, Iassume the lists,
Nor ask advice of anyother thought
But faithfulness andcourage.
I am no viper, yet I feed
On mother's flesh whichdid me breed.
I sought a husband, inwhich labour
I found that kindness in afather:
He's father, son, andhusband mild;
I mother, wife, and yethis child.
How they may be, and yetin two,
As you will live, resolveit you.
Sharp physic is the last:but, O you powers
That give heaven countlesseyes to view men's acts,
Why cloud they not theirsights perpetually,
If this be true, whichmakes me pale to read it?
Fair glass of light, Iloved you, and could still,
Were not this gloriouscasket stored with ill:
But I must tell you, nowmy thoughts revolt
For he's no man on whomperfections wait
That, knowing sin within,will touch the gate.
You are a fair viol, andyour sense the strings;
Who, finger'd to make manhis lawful music,
Would draw heaven down, andall the gods, to hearken:
But being play'd uponbefore your time,
Hell only danceth at soharsh a chime.
Good sooth, I care not foryou.
Prince Pericles, touchnot, upon thy life.
For that's an articlewithin our law,
As dangerous as the rest.Your time's expired:
Either expound now, orreceive your sentence.
Great king,
Few love to hear the sinsthey love to act;
'Twould braid yourself toonear for me to tell it.
Who has a book of all thatmonarchs do,
He's more secure to keepit shut than shown:
For vice repeated is likethe wandering wind.
Blows dust in other'seyes, to spread itself;
And yet the end of all isbought thus dear,
The breath is gone, andthe sore eyes see clear:
To stop the air would hurtthem. The blind mole casts
Copp'd hills towards heaven,to tell the earth is throng'd
By man's oppression; and thepoor worm doth die for't.
Kings are earth's gods; invice their law's their will;
And if Jove stray, whodares say Jove doth ill?
It is enough you know; andit is fit,
What being more known growsworse, to smother it.
All love the womb thattheir first being bred,
Then give my tongue likeleave to love my head.
Would that I had thy head!
He has found the meaning:
But I will gloze with him.--
Young prince of Tyre,
Though by the tenor of ourstrict edict,
Your expositionmisinterpreting,
We might proceed to cancelof your days;
Yet hope, succeeding fromso fair a tree
As your fair self, dothtune us otherwise:
Forty days longer we dorespite you;
If by which time oursecret be undone,
This mercy shows we'll joyin such a son:
And until then yourentertain shall be
As doth befit our honourand your worth.
How courtesy would seem tocover sin,
When what is done is likean hypocrite,
The which is good innothing but in sight!
If it be true that Iinterpret false,
Then were it certain youwere not so bad
As with foul incest toabuse your soul;
Where now you're both afather and a son,
By your untimely claspingswith your child,
Which pleasure fits anhusband, not a father;
And she an eater of hermother's flesh,
By the defiling of herparent's bed;
And both like serpentsare, who though they feed
On sweetest flowers, yetthey poison breed.
Antioch, farewell! forwisdom sees, those men
Blush not in actionsblacker than the night,
Will shun no course tokeep them from the light.
One sin, I know, anotherdoth provoke;
Murder's as near to lustas flame to smoke:
Poison and treason are thehands of sin,
Ay, and the targets, toput off the shame:
Then, lest my lie becropp'd to keep you clear,
By flight I'll shun thedanger which I fear.
He hath found the meaning,for which I mean
To have his head.
He must not live totrumpet forth my infamy,
Nor tell the worldAntiochus doth sin
In such a loathed manner;
And therefore instantlythis prince must die:
For by his fall my honourmust keep high.
Who attends us there?
Doth your highness call?
Thaliard,
You are of our chamber Thaliard,and our mind partakes
Her private actions toyour secrecy;
And for your faithfulnesswe will advance you.
Thaliard, behold, here'spoison, and here's gold;
We hate the prince of Tyre,and thou must kill him:
It fits thee not to askthe reason why,
Because we bid it. Say, isit done?
My lord,
'Tis done.
Enough.
Let your breath coolyourself, telling your haste.
My lord, prince Periclesis fled.
As thou wilt live, fly after:
and like an arrow shot
From a well-experiencedarcher hits the mark
His eye doth level at, sothou ne'er return
Unless thou say 'PrincePericles is dead.'
My lord,
If I can get him within mypistol's length,
I'll make him sure enough: so,farewell to your highness.
Thaliard, adieu!
Till Pericles be dead,
My heart can lend nosuccor to my head.
(♪ music)
Let none disturb us.--
Why should thischange of thoughts,
The sad companion,dull-eyed melancholy,
Be my so used a guest asnot an hour,
In the day's gloriouswalk, or peaceful night,
The tomb where grief shouldsleep, can breed me quiet?
Here pleasures court mineeyes, and mine eyes shun them,
And danger, which Ifear'd, is at Antioch,
Whose aim seems far tooshort to hit me here:
Yet neither pleasure's artcan joy my spirits,
Nor yet the other'sdistance comfort me.
Then it is thus: thepassions of the mind,
That have their firstconception by mis-dread,
Have after-nourishment andlife by care;
And what was first butfear what might be done,
Grows elder now and caresit be not done.
And so with me: the greatAntiochus,
'Gainst whom I am toolittle to contend,
Since he's so great canmake his will his act,
Will think me speaking,though I swear to silence;
Nor boots it me to say Ihonour him.
If he suspect I maydishonour him:
And what may make himblush in being known,
He'll stop the course bywhich it might be known;
With hostile forces he'llo'erspread the land,
And with the ostent of warwill look so huge,
Amazement shall drivecourage from the state;
Our men be vanquish'd erethey do resist,
And subjects punish'd thatne'er thought offence:
Which care of them, notpity of myself,
Who am no more but as thetops of trees,
Which fence the roots theygrow by and defend them,
Makes both my body pineand soul to languish,
And punish that beforethat he would punish.
Joy and all comfort inyour sacred breast!
And keep your mind,Peaceful and comfortable!
Peace, peace, and giveexperience tongue.
They do abuse the kingthat flatter him:
For flattery is thebellows blows up sin;
Whereas reproof, obedientand in order,
Fits kings, as they aremen, for they may err.
When Signior Sooth heredoes proclaim a peace,
He flatters you, makes warupon your life.
Prince, pardon me, orstrike me, if you please;
I cannot be much lowerthan my knees.
All leave us else; but letyour cares o'erlook
What shipping and whatlading's in our haven,
And then return to us.
Helicanus, thou Hast moved us:
what seest thou in our looks?
An angry brow, dread lord.
If there be such a dart inprinces' frowns,
How durst thy tongue moveanger to our face?
How dare the plants lookup to heaven, from whence
They have theirnourishment?
Thou know'st I have power
To take thy life fromthee.
I have ground the axemyself;
Do you but strike theblow.
Rise, prithee, rise.
Sit down: thou art noflatterer:
I thank thee for it; andheaven forbid
That kings should let theirears hear their faults hid!
Fit counsellor and servantfor a prince,
Who by thy wisdom makest aprince thy servant,
What wouldst thou have medo?
To bear with patience
Such griefs as you dolay upon yourself.
Thou speak'st like aphysician, Helicanus,
That minister'st a potionunto me
That thou wouldst trembleto receive thyself.
Attend me, then: I went toAntioch,
Where as thou know'st,against the face of death,
I sought the purchase of aglorious beauty.
From whence an issue Imight propagate,
Are arms to princes, andbring joys to subjects.
Her face was to mine eyebeyond all wonder;
The rest--hark in thineear--as black as incest:
Which by my knowledgefound, the sinful father
Seem'd not to strike, butsmooth: but thou know'st this,
'Tis time to fear whentyrants seem to kiss.
Such fear so grew in me, Ihither fled,
Under the covering of acareful night,
Who seem'd my goodprotector; and, being here,
Bethought me what waspast, what might succeed.
I knew him tyrannous; andtyrants' fears
Decrease not, but growfaster than the years:
And should he doubt it, asno doubt he doth,
That I should open to thelistening air
How many worthy princes'bloods were shed,
To keep his bed ofblackness unlaid ope,
To lop that doubt, he'llfill this land with arms,
And make pretence of wrongthat I have done him:
When all, for mine, if Imay call offence,
Must feel war's blow, whospares not innocence:
Which love to all, ofwhich thyself art one,
Who now reprovest me forit,--
Alas, sir!
Drew sleep out of mineeyes, blood from my cheeks,
Musings into my mind, withthousand doubts
How I might stop thistempest ere it came;
And finding little comfortto relieve them,
I thought it princelycharity to grieve for them.
Well, my lord, since you havegiven me leave to speak.
Freely will I speak.Antiochus you fear,
And justly too, I think,you fear the tyrant,
Who either by public waror private treason
Will take away your life.
Therefore, my lord, gotravel for a while,
Till that his rage andanger be forgot,
Or till the Destinies docut his thread of life.
Your rule direct to any;if to me.
Day serves not light morefaithful than I'll be.
I do not doubt thy faith;
But should he wrong myliberties in my absence?
We'll mingle our bloodstogether in the earth,
From whence we had ourbeing and our birth.
Tyre, I now look from theethen, and to Tarsus
Intend my travel, whereI'll hear from thee;
And by whose letters I'lldispose myself.
The care I had and have ofsubjects' good
On thee I lay whose wisdom'sstrength can bear it.
I'll take thy word forfaith, not ask thine oath:
Who shuns not to break onewill sure crack both:
But in our orbs we'll liveso round and safe,
That time of both thistruth shall ne'er convince,
Thou show'dst a subject'sshine, I a true prince.
(♪ music)
So, this is Tyre,and this the court.
Here must I kill King Pericles;
and if I do it not, I amsure to be hanged at home:
'tis dangerous.Well, I perceive
he was a wise fellow, andhad good discretion, that,
being bid to ask what hewould of the king, desired
he might know none of hissecrets: now do I see he
had some reason for't; forif a king bid a man be a
villain, he's bound by theindenture of his oath to
be one! Hush! here comethe lords of Tyre.
You shall not need, myfellow peers of Tyre,
Further to question me ofyour king's departure:
His seal'd commission,left in trust with me,
Doth speak sufficientlyhe's gone to travel.
How! the king gone!
If further yet you will besatisfied,
Why, as it were unlicensedof your loves,
He would depart, I'll givesome light unto you.
Being at Antioch--
What from Antioch?
Royal Antiochus--on whatcause I know not--
Took some displeasure athim; at least he judged so:
And doubting lest that hehad err'd or sinn'd,
To show his sorrow, he'ldcorrect himself;
So puts himself unto theshipman's toil,
With whom each minutethreatens life or death.
Well, I perceive
I shall not be hang'd now,
But since he's gone, theking's seas must please:
He 'scaped the land, toperish at the sea.
I'll present myself. Peaceto the lords of Tyre!
Lord Thaliard fromAntiochus is welcome.
From him I come
With message unto princelyPericles;
But since my landing Ihave understood
Your lord has betookhimself to unknown travels,
My message must returnfrom whence it came.
We have no reason todesire it,
Commended to our master,not to us:
Yet, ere you shall depart,this we desire,
As friends to Antioch, wemay feast in Tyre.
(♪ music)
My Dionyza, shall we restus here,
And by relating tales ofothers' griefs,
See if 'twill teach us toforget our own?
That were to blow at firein hope to quench it;
For who digs hills becausethey do aspire
Throws down one mountainto cast up a higher.
O my distressed lord, evensuch our griefs are;
Here they're but felt, andseen with mischief's eyes,
But like to groves, beingtopp'd, they higher rise.
O Dionyza,
Who wanteth food, and willnot say he wants it,
Or can conceal his hungertill he famish?
Our tongues and sorrows force usto sound deep
Our woes into the air; oureyes do weep,
Till tongues fetch breath thatmay proclaim them louder;
That, if heaven slumberwhile their creatures want,
They may awake their helpsto comfort them.
I'll then discourse ourwoes, felt several years,
And wanting breath tospeak help me with tears.
I'll do my best, sir.
This Tarsus, o'er which Ihave the government,
A city on whom plenty heldfull hand,
For riches strew'd herselfeven in the streets;
Whose towers bore heads sohigh they kiss'd the clouds,
And strangers ne'er beheldbut wondered at;
Whose men and dames sojetted and adorn'd,
Like one another's glassto trim them by:
Their tables were storedfull, to glad the sight,
And not so much to feed onas delight;
All poverty was scorn'd,and pride so great,
The name of help grewodious to repeat.
O, 'tis too true.
But see what heaven cando! By this our change,
These mouths, who but oflate, earth, sea, and air,
Were all too little tocontent and please,
Although they gave theircreatures in abundance,
As houses are defiled forwant of use,
They are now starved forwant of exercise:
Those palates who, not yettwo summers younger,
Must have inventions todelight the taste,
Would now be glad ofbread, and beg for it:
Those mothers who, tonousle up their babes,
Thought nought toocurious, are ready now
To eat those littledarlings whom they loved.
So sharp are hunger'steeth, that man and wife
Draw lots who first shalldie to lengthen life:
Here stands a lord, andthere a lady weeping;
Here many sink, yet thosewhich see them fall
Have scarce strength leftto give them burial.
Is not this true?
Our cheeks and hollow eyesdo witness it.
O, let those cities thatof plenty's cup
And her prosperities solargely taste,
With their superfluousriots, hear these tears!
The misery of Tarsus maybe theirs.
Where's the lord governor?
Here.
Speak out thy sorrows whichthou bring'st in haste,
For comfort is too far forus to expect.
We have descried, upon ourneighbouring shore,
A portly sail of shipsmake hitherward.
I thought as much.
One sorrow never comes butbrings an heir,
That may succeed as hisinheritor;
And so in ours: someneighbouring nation,
Taking advantage of ourmisery,
Hath stuff'd these hollowvessels with their power,
To beat us down, the whichare down already;
And make a conquest ofunhappy me,
That's the least fear;for, by the semblance
Of their white flags display'd,they bring us peace,
And come to us asfavourers, not as foes.
Thou speak'st like him'suntutor'd to repeat:
Who makes the fairest showmeans most deceit.
But bring they what theywill and what they can,
What need we fear?
The ground's the lowest,and we are half way there.
Go tell their general weattend him here,
To know for what he comes,and whence he comes,
And what he craves.
I go, my lord.
Welcome is peace, if he onpeace consist;
If wars, we are unable toresist.
(♪ music)
Lord governor, for so wehear you are,
Let not our ships andnumber of our men
Be like a beacon fired toamaze your eyes.
We have heard yourmiseries as far as Tyre,
And seen the desolation ofyour streets:
Nor come we to add sorrowto your hearts,
But to relieve them oftheir heavy load;
And these our ships, youhappily may think
Are like the Trojan horsewas stuff'd within
With bloody veins,expecting overthrow,
Are stored with corn tomake your needy bread,
And give them life whomhunger starved half dead.
The gods of Greece protectyou!
And we'll pray for you.
Arise, I pray you, rise:
We do not look forreverence, but for love,
And harbourage for ourself,our ships, and men.
The which when any shallnot gratify,
Or pay you withunthankfulness in thought,
Be it our wives, ourchildren, or ourselves,
The curse of heaven andmen succeed their evils!
Till when,--the which Ihope shall ne'er be seen,--
Your grace is welcome toour town and us.
Which welcome we'llaccept; feast here awhile,
Until our stars that frownlend us a smile.
(♪ music)
Here have you seen amighty king
His child, I wis, toincest bring;
A better prince and benignlord,
That will prove awful bothin deed and word.
Be quiet then as menshould be,
Till he hath pass'dnecessity.
I'll show you those introubles reign,
Losing a mite, a mountaingain.
The good in conversation,
To whom I give my benison,
Is still at Tarsus, whereeach man
Thinks all is writ hespoken can;
And, to remember what hedoes,
Build his statue to makehim glorious:
But tidings to thecontrary
Are brought your eyes;what need speak I?
Good Helicane, hath stay'dat home,
Not to eat honey like adrone
From others' labours; forthough he strive
To killen bad, keep goodalive;
And to fulfil his prince'desire,
Sends word of all thathaps in Tyre:
How Thaliard came fullbent with sin
And had intent to murderhim;
And that in Tarsus was notbest
Longer for him to make hisrest.
He, doing so, put forth toseas,
Where when men been,there's seldom ease;
For now the wind begins toblow;
Thunder above and deepsbelow
Make such unquiet, thatthe ship
Should house him safe iswreck'd and split;
And he, good prince,having all lost,
By waves from coast tocoast is tost:
All perishen of man, ofpelf,
Ne aught escapen buthimself;
Till fortune, tired withdoing bad,
Threw him ashore, to givehim glad:
And here he comes. Whatshall be next,
Pardon old Gower,--thislongs the text.
Yet cease your ire, youangry stars of heaven!
Wind, rain, and thunder,remember, earthly man
Is but a substance thatmust yield to you;
And I, as fits my nature,do obey you:
Alas, the sea hath cast meon the rocks,
Wash'd me from shore toshore, and left me breath
Nothing to think on butensuing death:
Let it suffice thegreatness of your powers
To have bereft a prince ofall his fortunes;
And having thrown him fromyour watery grave,
Here to have death inpeace is all he'll crave.
What, ho, Pilch!
Ha, come and bring awaythe nets!
What, Patch-breech, I say!
What say you, master?
Look how thou stirrestnow! come away, or I'll
fetch thee with a wanion.
Faith, master, I am thinkingof the poor men that
were cast away before useven now.
Alas, poor souls, it grievedmy heart to hear what
pitiful cries they made tous to help them, when,
well-a-day, we couldscarce help ourselves.
Nay, master, said not I asmuch when I saw the
porpus how he bounced andtumbled? they say
they're half fish, halfflesh: a plague on them,
they ne'er come but I lookto be washed. Master, I
marvel how the fishes livein the sea.
Why, as men do a-land; thegreat ones eat up the
little ones: I can compareyour rich misers to
nothing so fitly as to awhale; a' plays and
tumbles, driving the poorfry before him, and at
last devours them all at amouthful: such whales
have I heard on o' the land,who never leave gaping
till they've swallowed thewhole parish, church,
steeple, bells, and all.
A pretty moral.
But, master, if I hadbeen the sexton,
I would have been thatday in the belfry.
Why, man?
Because he should haveswallowed me too: and when I
had been in his belly, Iwould have kept such a
jangling of the bells, thathe should never have left,
till he cast bells,steeple, church,
and parish up again. But ifthe good King Simonides
were of my mind,--
Simonides!
We would purge the land ofthese drones, that rob
the bee of her honey.
How from the finnysubject of the sea
These fishers tell theinfirmities of men;
And from their wateryempire recollect
All that may men approveor men detect!
Peace be at your labour,honest fishermen.
Honest! good fellow, what'sthat? If it be a day fits you,
search out of the calendar,and nobody look after it.
May see the sea hath castupon your coast.
What a drunken knave was thesea to cast thee in our way!
A man whom both thewaters and the wind,
In that vast tennis-court,have made the ball
For them to play upon,entreats you pity him:
He asks of you, that neverused to beg.
No, friend, cannot youbeg? Here's them in our
land of Greece getsmore with begging
than we can get with working.
Canst thou catch anyfishes, then?
I never practised it.
Nay, then thou wilt starve,sure; for here's nothing
to be got now-a-days, unlessthou canst fish for't.
What I have been I haveforgot to know;
But what I am, wantteaches me to think on:
A man throng'd up withcold: my veins are chill,
And have no more of lifethan may suffice
To give my tongue thatheat to ask your help;
Which if you shall refuse,when I am dead,
For that I am a man, praysee me buried.
Die quoth-a? Now godsforbid! I have a coat here;
come, put it on; keep theewarm. Now, afore me,
a handsome fellow! Come,thou shalt go home,
and we'll have fleshfor holidays,
fish for fasting-days,and moreo'er puddings
and flap-jacks, andthou shalt be welcome.
I thank you, sir.
Hark you, my friend; yousaid you could not beg.
I did but crave.
But crave! Then I'll turncraver too, and so I
shall 'scape whipping.
Why, are all your beggarswhipped, then?
O, not all, my friend, notall; for if all your
beggars were whipped, Iwould wish no better office
than to be beadle. But, master,I'll go draw up the net.
How well this honest mirthbecomes their labour!
Hark you, friend, do you knowwhere ye are?
Not well.
Why, I'll tell thee: thisis called Pentapolis,
and our king thegood Simonides.
The good Simonides,do you call him.
Ay, sir; and he deservesso to be called for his
peaceable reign and goodgovernment.
He is a happy king, sincehe gains from his subjects
the name of good by hisgovernment. How far is his
court distant from thisshore?
Marry, sir, halfa day's journey:
and I'll tell thee, hehath a fair daughter,
and to-morrow is her birth-day;and there be knights
and princes come from allparts of the world to just
and tourney for her love.
Were my fortunesequal to my desires,
I could wish to make one there.
O, sir, things must be asthey may; and what a man
may not get, he may lawfullydeal for--his wife's soul.
Help, master, help! here'sa fish hangs in the net,
like a poor man's right in thelaw; 'twill hardly come out.
Ha! bots on't, 'tiscome at last,
and 'tis turned toa rusty armour.
An armour, friends! I prayyou, let me see it.
Thanks, fortune, yet, that,after all my crosses,
Thou givest me somewhat torepair myself;
And though it was mineown, part of my heritage,
Which my dead father didbequeath to me.
With this strict charge,even as he left his life,
'Keep it, my Pericles; ithath been a shield
Twixt me and death;'--andpointed to this brace;--
'For that it saved me, keepit; in like necessity--
The which the godsprotect thee from!--
may defend thee.'
It kept where I kept, I sodearly loved it;
Till the rough seas, thatspare not any man,
Took it in rage, thoughcalm'd have given't again:
I thank thee for't: myshipwreck now's no ill,
Since I have here myfather's gift in's will.
What mean you, sir?
To beg of you, kind friends,this coat of worth,
For it was sometime targetto a king;
I know it by this mark. Heloved me dearly,
And for his sake I wishthe having of it;
And that you'ld guide meto your sovereign's court,
Where with it I may appeara gentleman;
And if that ever my lowfortune's better,
I'll pay your bounties;till then rest your debtor.
Why, wilt thou tourney forthe lady?
I'll show the virtue Ihave borne in arms.
Why, do 'e take it, and thegods give thee good on't!
Ay, but hark you, my friend;'twas we that made up
this garment through therough seams of the waters:
there are certaincondolements, certain vails.
I hope, sir, if you thrive,you'll remember from
whence you had it.
Believe 't, I will.
By your furtherance I amclothed in steel;
And, spite of all therapture of the sea,
This jewel holds hisbuilding on my arm:
Unto thy value I willmount myself
Upon a courser, whosedelightful steps
Shall make the gazer joyto see him tread.
Only, my friend, I yet amunprovided
Of a pair of bases.
We'll sure provide: thoushalt have my best gown to
make thee a pair; and I'llbring thee to the court myself.
Then honour be but equalto my will,
This day I'll rise, orelse add ill to ill.
(♪ music)
Are the knights ready tobegin the triumph?
They are, my liege;
And stay your coming topresent themselves.
Return them, we are ready;and our daughter,
In honour of whose birththese triumphs are,
Sits here, like beauty'schild, whom nature gat
For men to see, and seeingwonder at.
It pleaseth you, my royalfather, to express
My commendations great,whose merit's less.
It's fit it should be so;for princes are
A model which heaven makeslike to itself:
As jewels lose their gloryif neglected,
So princes their renownsif not respected.
'Tis now your honour,daughter, to entertain
The labour of each knightin his device.
Which, to preserve minehonour, I'll perform.
Who is the first that dothprefer himself?
A knight of Sparta, myrenowned father;
And the device he bearsupon his shield
Is a black Ethiopereaching at the sun
The word, 'Lux tua vitamihi.'
He loves you well thatholds his life of you.
Who is the second thatpresents himself?
A prince of Macedon, myroyal father;
And the device he bearsupon his shield
Is an arm'd knight that'sconquer'd by a lady;
The motto thus, in Spanish,
'Piu por dulzuraque por fuerza.'
Ah, May gentleness, not force,win me the day.
And what's the third?
The third of Antioch;
And his device, a wreathof chivalry;
The word, 'Me pompaeprovexit apex.'
Desire to gain renoun hath setme on
This is the fourth.
A burning torch that'sturned upside down;
The word, 'Quod me alit,me extinguit.'
Which shows that beautyhath his power and will,
It can as well inflameas it can kill.
The fifth, an handenvironed with clouds,
Holding out gold that's bythe touchstone tried;
The motto thus, 'Sicspectanda fides.'
Thus can you try unlastingfaithfulness.
And what's the sixth and last,
the which the knight himself
With such a gracefulcourtesy deliver'd?
He seems to be a stranger;but his present is
A wither'd branch, that'sonly green at top;
The motto, 'In hac spevivo.'
A pretty moral;
In this hope, I live.
From the dejected statewherein he is,
He hopes by you hisfortunes yet may flourish.
He had need mean betterthan his outward show
Can any way speak in hisjust commend;
For by his rusty outsidehe appears
To have practised more thewhipstock than the lance.
He well may be a stranger,for he comes
To an honour'd triumphstrangely furnished.
And on set purpose let hisarmour rust
Until this day, to scourit in the dust.
Opinion's but a fool, thatmakes us scan
The outward habit by theinward man.
But stay, the knights arecoming: we will withdraw
Into the gallery.
(♪ music and the sound of a crowd)
(horses hooves and chantingcrowds)
Knights,
To say you're welcome weresuperfluous.
To place upon the volumeof your deeds,
As in a title-page, yourworth in arms,
Were more than you expect,or more than's fit,
Since every worth in showcommends itself.
Prepare for mirth, formirth becomes a feast:
You are princes and myguests.
But you, my knight andguest;
To whom this wreath ofvictory I give,
And crown you king of thisday's happiness.
'Tis more by fortune,lady, than by merit.
Call it by what you will,the day is yours;
And here, I hope, is nonethat envies it.
In framing an artist, arthath thus decreed,
To make some good, butothers to exceed;
And you are herlabour'd scholar.
Come, queen o' the feast,--
For, daughter, so you are,--
here take your place:
Marshal the rest, as theydeserve their grace.
We are honour'd much bygood Simonides.
Your presence glads ourdays: honour we love;
For who hates honour hatesthe gods above.
Sir, yonder is your place.
Some other is more fit.
Contend not, sir; for weare gentlemen
That neither in our heartsnor outward eyes
Envy the great nor do thelow despise.
You are right courteousknights.
Sit, sir, sit.
By Jove, I wonder, that isking of thoughts,
These cates resist me, hebut thought upon.
By Juno, that is queen ofmarriage,
All viands that I eat doseem unsavoury.
Wishing him my meat. Sure,he's a gallant gentleman.
He's but a countrygentleman;
Has done no more thanother knights have done;
Has broken a staff or so;so let it pass.
To me he seems likediamond to glass.
Yon king's to me like tomy father's picture,
Which tells me in thatglory once he was;
Had princes sit, likestars, about his throne,
And he the sun, for themto reverence;
None that beheld him, but,like lesser lights,
Did vail their crowns tohis supremacy:
Where now his son's like aglow-worm in the night,
The which hath fire indarkness, none in light:
Whereby I see that Time'sthe king of men,
He's both their parent,and he is their grave,
And gives them what hewill, not what they crave.
What, are you merry,knights?
Who can be other in thisroyal presence?
Here, with a cup that'sstored unto the brim,--
As you do love, fill toyour mistress' lips,--
We drink this health toyou.
We thank your grace.
Yet pause awhile:
Yon knight doth sit toomelancholy,
As if the entertainment inour court
Had not a show mightcountervail his worth.
Note it not you, Thaisa?
What is't to me, my father?
O, attend, my daughter:
Princes in this shouldlive like gods above,
Who freely give to everyone that comes
To honour them:
Therefore to make hisentertain more sweet,
Here, say we drink thisstanding-bowl of wine to him.
Alas, my father, it befitsnot me
Unto a stranger knight tobe so bold:
He may my proffer take foran offence,
Since men take women'sgifts for impudence.
How!
Do as I bid you, or you'llmove me else.
Now, by the gods, he couldnot please me better.
And furthermore tell him,we desire to know
Of whence he is, his nameand parentage.
The king my father, sir,has drunk to you.
I thank him.
Wishing it so much bloodunto your life.
I thank both him and you,and pledge him freely.
And further he desires toknow of you,
Of whence you are, yourname and parentage.
A gentleman of Tyre; myname, Pericles;
My education been in artsand arms;
Who, looking foradventures in the world,
Was by the rough seas reftof ships and men,
And after shipwreck drivenupon this shore.
He thanks your grace;names himself Pericles,
A gentleman of Tyre,
Who only by misfortune ofthe seas
Bereft of ships and men,cast on this shore.
Now, by the gods, I pityhis misfortune,
And will awake him fromhis melancholy.
Come, gentlemen, we sittoo long on trifles,
And waste the time, whichlooks for other revels.
(laughing)
Even in your armours, asyou are address'd,
Will very well become asoldier's dance.
I will not have excuse,with saying this
Loud music is too harshfor ladies' heads,
Since they love men inarms as well as beds.
(♪ music)
So, this was well ask'd,'twasso well perform'd.
Come, sir;
Here is a lady that wantsbreathing too:
And I have heard, youknights of Tyre
Are excellent in makingladies trip;
And that their measuresare as excellent.
In those that practisethem they are, my lord.
O, that's as much as youwould be denied
Of your fair courtesy.
Unclasp, unclasp:
Thanks, gentlemen, to all;all have done well.
But you the best.Pages and lights,
To conduct these knights untotheir several lodgings!
Yours, sir, We have givenorder to be next our own.
I am at your grace'spleasure.
Princes, it is too late totalk of love;
And that's the mark I knowyou level at:
Therefore each one betakehim to his rest;
To-morrow all for speedingdo their best.
No, Escanes, know this ofme,
Antiochus from incestlived not free:
For which, the most highgods not minding longer
To withhold the vengeancethat they had in store,
Due to this heinouscapital offence,
Even in the height andpride of all his glory,
When he was seated in achariot
Of an inestimable value,and his daughter with him,
A fire from heaven cameand shrivell'd up
Their bodies, even toloathing; for they so stunk,
That all those eyes adoredthem ere their fall
Scorn now their handshould give them burial.
'Twas very strange.
And yet but justice;
for though this king were great,his greatness was no guard
To bar heaven's shaft, butsin had his reward.
'Tis very true.
See, not a man in privateconference
Or council has respectwith him but he.
It shall no longer grievewithout reproof.
And cursed be he that willnot second it.
Follow me, then.
Lord Helicane, a word.
With me? and welcome:happy day, my lords.
Know that our griefs arerisen to the top,
And now at length theyoverflow their banks.
Your griefs! for what? wrongnot your prince you love.
Wrong not yourself, then,noble Helicane;
But if the prince do live,let us salute him,
Or know what ground's madehappy by his breath.
If in the world he live,we'll seek him out;
If in his grave he rest,we'll find him there;
And be resolved he livesto govern us,
Or dead, give's cause tomourn his funeral,
And leave us to our freeelection.
Whose death indeed's thestrongest in our censure:
And knowing this kingdomis without a head,--
Like goodly buildings leftwithout a roof
Soon fall to ruin,--yournoble self,
That best know how to ruleand how to reign,
We thus submit unto,--oursovereign.
Live, noble Helicane!
By honour's cause,forbear your suffrages:
If that you love PrincePericles, forbear.
Take I your wish, I leapinto the seas,
Where's hourly trouble fora minute's ease.
A twelvemonth longer, letme entreat you
Further to bear the absence ofyour king:
If in which time expired,he not return,
I shall with aged patiencebear your yoke.
But if I cannot win you tothis love,
Go search like nobles,like noble subjects,
And in your search spendyour adventurous worth;
Whom if you find, and winunto return,
You shall like diamondssit about his crown.
To wisdom he's a fool thatwill not yield;
And since Lord Helicaneenjoineth us,
We with our travels willendeavour it.
Then you love us, we you,and we'll clasp hands:
When peers thus knit, akingdom ever stands.
Good morrow to the goodSimonides.
Knights, from my daughterthis I let you know,
That for this twelvemonthshe'll not undertake
A married life.
Her reason to herself isonly known,
Which from her by nomeans can I get.
May we not get access toher, my lord?
'Faith, by no means; shehas so strictly tied
Her to her chamber, that'tis impossible.
One twelve moons moreshe'll wear Diana's livery;
This by the eye of Cynthiahath she vow'd
And on her virgin honourwill not break it.
Loath to bid farewell, wetake our leaves.
So, They are well dispatch'd;now to my daughter's letter:
She tells me here, she'dwed the stranger knight,
Or never more to view norday nor light.
'Tis well, mistress; yourchoice agrees with mine;
I like that well: nay, howabsolute she's in't,
Not minding whether Idislike or no!
Well, I do commend herchoice;
And will no longer have itbe delay'd.
Soft! here he comes: Imust dissemble it.
All fortune to the goodSimonides!
To you as much, sir! I ambeholding to you
For your sweet musicthis last night:
I do protest my earswere never better fed
With such delightfulpleasing harmony.
It is your grace'spleasure to commend;
Not my desert.
Sir, you are music'smaster.
The worst of all herscholars, my good lord.
Let me ask you one thing:
What do you think of mydaughter, sir?
A most virtuous princess.
And she is fair too, isshe not?
As a fair day in summer,wondrous fair.
Sir, my daughter thinksvery well of you;
Ay, so well, that you mustbe her master,
And she will be your scholar:therefore look to it.
I am unworthy for herschoolmaster.
She thinks not so; perusethis writing else.
What's here?
A letter, that she lovesthe knight of Tyre!
'Tis the king's subtletyto have my life.
O, seek not to entrap me,gracious lord,
A stranger and distressedgentleman,
That never aim'd so highto love your daughter,
But bent all offices tohonour her.
Thou hast bewitch'd my daughter,and thou art a villain.
By the gods, I have not:
Never did thought of minelevy offence;
Nor never did my actionsyet commence
A deed might gain her loveor your displeasure.
Traitor, thou liest.
Traitor!
Ay, traitor.
Even in his throat--unlessit be the king--
That calls me traitor, Ireturn the lie.
Now, by the gods, I doapplaud his courage.
My actions are as noble asmy thoughts,
That never relish'd of abase descent.
I came unto your court forhonour's cause,
And not to be a rebel toher state;
And he that otherwiseaccounts of me,
This sword shall provehe's honour's enemy.
No?
Here comes my daughter,she can witness it.
Then, as you are asvirtuous as fair,
Resolve your angry father,if my tongue
Did ere solicit, or myhand subscribe
To any syllable that madelove to you.
Why, sir, say if you had,
Who takes offence at thatwould make me glad?
Yea, mistress, are you soperemptory?
I am glad on't with all myheart.--
I'll tame you; I'll bringyou in subjection.
Will you, not having myconsent,
Bestow your love and youraffections
Upon a stranger?
who, for aught I know,
May be, nor can I thinkthe contrary,
As great in blood as Imyself.--
Therefore hear you,mistress; either frame
Your will to mine,--andyou, sir, hear you,
Either be ruled by me, orI will make you--
Man and wife:
Nay, come, your hands andlips must seal it too:
And being join'd, I'llthus your hopes destroy;
And for a furthergrief,--God give you joy!--
What, are you bothpleased?
Yes, if you love me, sir.
Even as my life, or bloodthat fosters it.
What, are you both agreed?
Yes, if it please yourmajesty.
It pleaseth me so well,that I will see you wed;
And then with what hasteyou can get you to bed.
Now sleep y-slaked haththe rout;
No din but snores thehouse about,
Made louder by theo'er-fed breast
Of this most pompousmarriage-feast.
The cat, with eyne ofburning coal,
Now crouches fore themouse's hole;
And crickets sing at theoven's mouth,
E'er the blither for theirdrouth.
Hymen hath brought thebride to bed.
Where, by the loss ofmaidenhead,
A babe is moulded. Beattent,
And time that is sobriefly spent
With your fine fanciesquaintly eche:
What's dumb in show I'llplain with speech.
By many a dern and painfulperch
Of Pericles the carefulsearch,
By the four opposingcoigns
Which the world togetherjoins,
Is made with all duediligence
That horse and sail andhigh expense
Can stead the quest. Atlast from Tyre,
Fame answering the moststrange inquire,
To the court of KingSimonides
Are letters brought, thetenor these:
Antiochus and his daughterdead;
The men of Tyrus on thehead
Of Helicanus would set on
The crown of Tyre, but hewill none:
The mutiny he there hastest' oppress;
Says to 'em, if KingPericles
Come not home in twice sixmoons,
He, obedient to theirdooms,
Will take the crown. Thesum of this,
Brought hither toPentapolis,
Y-ravished the regionsround,
And every one with clapscan sound,
'Our heir-apparent is aking!
Who dream'd, who thoughtof such a thing?'
Brief, he must hencedepart to Tyre:
His queen with child makesher desire--
Which who shallcross?--along to go:
Omit we all their dole andwoe:
Lychorida, her nurse, shetakes,
And so to sea.
Their vessel shakes on Neptune'sbillow; half the flood
Hath their keel cut: butfortune's mood
Varies again; the grislynorth
Disgorges such a tempestforth,
That, as a duck for lifethat dives,
So up and down the poorship drives:
The lady shrieks, andwell-a-near
Does fall in travail withher fear:
And what ensues in thisfell storm
Shall for itself itselfperform.
I nill relate, action may
Conveniently the restconvey;
Which might not what by meis told.
In your imagination hold
This stage the ship, uponwhose deck
The sea-tost Periclesappears to speak.
Thou god of this greatvast, rebuke these surges,
Which wash both heaven andhell; and thou, that hast
Upon the winds command,bind them in brass,
Having call'd themfrom the deep!
O, still thy deafening,dreadful thunders;
gently quench thy nimble,sulphurous flashes!
O, how, Lychorida,How does my queen?
Thou stormest venomously;
Wilt thou spit all thyself?The seaman's whistle
Is as a whisper in theears of death,
Unheard. Lychorida!--Lucina,
O Divinest patroness,and midwife gentle
To those that cry bynight, convey thy deity
Aboard our dancing boat;make swift the pangs
Of my queen's travails!
Here is a thing too youngfor such a place,
Who, if it hadconceit, would die,
as I am like to do: takein your arms this piece
Of your dead queen.
How, how, Lychorida!
Patience, good sir; do notassist the storm.
Here's all that is leftliving of your queen,
A little daughter: for thesake of it,
Be manly, and takecomfort.
O you gods!
Why do you make us loveyour goodly gifts,
And snatch them straightaway? We here below
Recall not what we give,and therein may
Use honour with you.
Patience, good sir,
Even for this charge.
Now, mild may be thy life!
For a more blustrous birthhad never babe:
Quiet and gentlethy conditions!
for thou art the rudeliestwelcome to this world
That ever was prince'schild. Happy what follows!
Thou hast as chiding anativity
As fire, air, water, earth,and heaven can make,
To herald thee from the womb:poor itch of nature
even at the first thy loss ismore than can thy portage quit,
With all thou canst findhere. Now, the good gods
Throw their best eyesupon't!
What courage, sir? Godsave you!
Courage enough: I do notfear the flaw;
It hath done to me theworst. Yet, for the love
Of this poor infant, thisfresh-new sea-farer,
I would it would be quiet.
Slack the bolins there!Thou wilt not, wilt thou?
Blow, and split thyself.
But sea-room, an the brine andcloudy billow kiss the moon,
I care not.
Sir, your queen mustoverboard: the sea works high,
the wind is loud, and willnot lie till the ship be
cleared of the dead.
That's your superstition.
Pardon us, sir; with us at seait hath been still observed:
and we are strong in custom.
Therefore briefly yield her; forshe must overboard straight.
As you think meet. Mostwretched queen!
Here she lies, sir.
A terrible childbed hastthou had, my dear;
No light, no fire: theunfriendly elements
Forgot thee utterly: norhave I time
To give thee hallow'd tothy grave, but straight
Must cast thee, scarcelycoffin'd, in the ooze;
Where, for a monument uponthy bones,
And e'er-remaining lamps,the belching whale
And humming water musto'erwhelm thy corpse,
Lying with simple shells.
O Lychorida,
Bid Nestor bring mespices, ink and paper,
My casket and my jewels;and bid Nicander
Bring me the satin coffer: laythe babe upon the pillow:
hie thee, whiles I say
A priestly farewell toher: suddenly, woman.
Sir, we have a chestbeneath the hatches,
caulked and bitumed ready.
I thank thee. Mariner, saywhat coast is this?
We are near Tarsus.
Thither, gentle mariner.
Alter thy course for Tyre.When canst thou reach it?
By break of day, if thewind cease.
O, make for Tarsus!
There will I visit Cleon,for the babe
Cannot hold out to Tyrus:
there I'll leave itat careful nursing.
Go thy ways, good mariner:
I'll bring the bodypresently.
Philemon, ho!
Doth my lord call?
Get fire and meat forthese poor men:
'T has been a turbulentand stormy night.
I have been in many; butsuch a night as this,
Till now, I ne'er endured.
Your master will be deadere you return;
There's nothing can beminister'd to nature
That can recover him.
Give this to the'pothecary,
And tell me how it works.
Good morrow.
Good morrow to yourlordship.
Gentlemen,
Why do you stir so early?
Sir,
Our lodgings, standingbleak upon the sea,
Shook as the earth didquake;
The very principals didseem to rend,
And all-to topple: puresurprise and fear
Made me to quit the house.
That is the cause wetrouble you so early;
'Tis not our husbandry.
O, you say well.
But I much marvel thatyour lordship, having
Rich tire about you, shouldat these early hours
Shake off the goldenslumber of repose.
'Tis most strange,
Nature should be soconversant with pain,
Being thereto notcompell'd.
I hold it ever,
Virtue and cunning wereendowments greater
Than nobleness and riches:careless heirs
May the two latter darkenand expend;
But immortality attendsthe former.
Making a man a god. 'Tis known,
I ever have studied physic,through which secret art,
By turning o'erauthorities, I have,
Together with my practise,made familiar
To me and to my aid theblest infusions
That dwell in vegetives,in metals, stones;
And I can speak of thedisturbances
That nature works, and of hercures; which doth give me
A more content in courseof true delight
Than to be thirsty aftertottering honour,
Or tie my treasure up insilken bags,
To please the fool anddeath.
Your honour has throughEphesus pour'd forth
Your charity, and hundredscall themselves
Your creatures, who by youhave been restored:
And not your knowledge,your personal pain,
but even your purse, stillopen, hath built Lord Cerimon
Such strong renown astime shall ne'er raise.
So; lift there.
What is that?
Sir, even now did the sea tossupon our shore this chest:
'Tis of some wreck.
Set 't down, let's lookupon't.
'Tis like a coffin, sir.
Whate'er it be, 'Tiswondrous heavy.
Wrench it open straight:
If the sea's stomach beo'ercharged with gold,
'Tis a good constraint offortune it belches upon us.
'Tis so, my lord.
How close 'tis caulk'd andbitumed!
Did the sea cast it up?
I never saw so huge abillow, sir,
As toss'd it upon shore.
Wrench it open;
Soft! it smells mostsweetly in my sense.
A delicate odour.
As ever hit my nostril.So, up with it.
O you most potent gods!what's here? a corse!
Most strange!
Shrouded in cloth of state;balm'd and entreasured
With full bags of spices!A passport too!
Apollo, perfect me in thecharacters!
'Here I give tounderstand,
If e'er this coffin drivea-land,
I, King Pericles, havelost this queen,
worth all our mundane cost.
Who finds her, give herburying;
She was the daughter of aking:
Besides this treasure fora fee,
The gods requite hischarity!'
O Pericles, If thou livest,thou hast a heart
That even cracks for woe!This chanced tonight.
Most likely, sir.
Nay, certainly to-night;
For look how fresh shelooks! They were too rough
That threw her in the sea.Make a fire within:
Fetch hither all my boxesin my closet.
Death may usurp on naturemany hours,
And yet the fire of lifekindle again
The o'erpress'd spirits. Iread of some Egyptians
Who after four hourse death,have raised impoverished spirits
Like to this, unto their formerheatlh.
Well said, well said; thefire and cloths.
The rough and woeful musicthat we have,
Cause it to sound, beseechyou.
The viol once more:
how thou stirr'st, thou block!
The music there!--I prayyou, give her air.
Gentlemen.
This queen will live:nature awakes; a warmth
Breathes out of her: shehath not been entranced
Above five hours: see howshe gins to blow
Into life's flower again!
The heavens, Through you,increase our wonder
and set up your fame forever.
She is alive; behold,
Her eyelids, cases tothose heavenly jewels
Which Pericles hath lost,
Begin to part theirfringes of bright gold;
The diamonds of a mostpraised water
Doth appear, to makethe world twice rich.
Live, and make us weep to hearyour fate, fair creature,
Rare as you seem to be.
O dear Diana,
Where am I? Where's mylord? What world is this?
Is not this strange?
Most rare.
Hush, my gentleneighbours!
Lend me your hands; to thenext chamber bear her.
Get linen: now this mattermust be look'd to,
For her relapse is mortal.Come, come;
And AEsculapius guide us!
Most honour'd Cleon, Imust needs be gone;
My twelve months areexpired, and Tyrus stands
In a litigious peace. You,and your lady,
Take from my heartall thankfulness!
The gods make upthe rest upon you!
Your strokes of fortune, thoughthey hurt you mortally,
Yet glance fullwoundingly on us.
O your sweet queen! That thestrict fates had pleased you
had brought her hither,
To have bless'd mine eyeswith her!
We cannot but obeythe powers above us.
Could I rage and roar as doth the sea she lies in,
yet the end must be as 'tis.
My gentle babe Marina, whom,
For she was born atsea, I have named so,
here I charge yourcharity withal,
leaving her the infant ofyour care; beseeching you
To give her princelytraining, that she may be
Manner'd as she is born.
Fear not, my lord, butthink
Your grace, that fed mycountry with your corn,
For which the people'sprayers still fall upon you,
Must in your childbe thought on.
If neglection should thereinmake me vile, the common body,
By you relieved, wouldforce me to my duty:
But if to that my natureneed a spur,
The gods revenge it uponme and mine,
To the end of generation!
I believe you;
Your honour and yourgoodness teach me to't,
Without your vows. Tillshe be married, madam,
By bright Diana,whom we honour,
all unscissor'd shall thishair of mine remain,
Though I show ill in't. SoI take my leave.
Good madam, make meblessed in your care
In bringing up my child.
I have one myself,
Who shall not be more dearto my respect
Than yours, my lord.
Madam, my thanks andprayers.
We'll bring your grace e'ento the edge o' the shore,
Then give you up tothe mask'd Neptune
and the gentlestwinds of heaven.
I will embrace your offer.
Come, dearest madam. O, notears, Lychorida, no tears:
Look to your littlemistress, on whose grace
You may depend hereafter.Come, my lord.
Madam, this letter, andsome certain jewels,
Lay with you in your coffer:
which are now at your command.
Know you the character?It is my lord's.
That I was shipp'd at sea,I well remember,
Even on my eaning time; butwhether there deliver'd,
by the holy gods, Icannot rightly say.
But since King Pericles,
My wedded lord, I ne'ershall see again,
A vestal livery will Itake me to,
And never more have joy.
Madam, if this you purposeas ye speak,
Diana's temple is notdistant far,
Where you may abide tillyour date expire.
Moreover, if you please, aniece of mine
Shall there attend you.
My recompense is thanks,that's all;
Yet my good will is great,though the gift small.
Imagine Pericles arrivedat Tyre,
Welcomed and settled tohis own desire.
His woeful queen we leaveat Ephesus,
Unto Diana there avotaress.
Now to Marina bend yourmind,
Whom our fast-growingscene must find
At Tarsus, and by Cleontrain'd
In music, letters; whohath gain'd
Of education all thegrace,
Which makes her both the heartand place of general wonder.
But, alack, That monsterenvy, oft the wrack
Of earned praise, Marina'slife
Seeks to take off bytreason's knife.
And in this kind ourCleon hath one daughter,
and a wench full grown,
Even ripe for marriage-rite;this maid hight Philoten:
and it is said forcertain in our story,
she would ever with Marina be:
Be't when she weaved thesleided silk
With fingers long, small,white as milk;
Or when she would withsharp needle wound
The cambric, which shemade more sound
By hurting it; or when tothe lute
She sung, and made thenight-bird mute,
That still records with moan;
or when She would withrich and constant pen
Vail to her mistress Dian;
Still, this Philotencontends in skill
With absolute Marina:
so with the dove ofPaphos might the crow
Vie feathers white.Marina gets all praises,
which are paid as debts,
And not as given. This sodarks
In Philoten all gracefulmarks,
That Cleon's wife, withenvy rare,
A present murderer doesprepare for good Marina,
that her daughter might standpeerless by this slaughter.
The sooner her vilethoughts to stead,
Lychorida, our nurse, isdead:
And cursed Dionyza hath
The pregnant instrument ofwrath prest for this blow.
The unborn event
I do commend to yourcontent:
Only I carry winged time
Post on the lame feet ofmy rhyme;
Which never could I soconvey,
Unless your thoughts wenton my way.
Dionyza does appear,
With Leonine, a murderer.
Thy oath remember; thouhast sworn to do't:
'Tis but a blow, whichnever shall be known.
Thou canst not do a thingin the world so soon,
To yield thee so muchprofit. Let not conscience,
Which is but cold, nor flaminglove thy bosom enslaved
too nicely; nor let pity,
which even women havecast off, melt thee,
but be a soldierto thy purpose.
I will do't; but yet sheis a goodly creature.
The fitter, then, thegods should have her.
Here she comes weeping forher only nurses' death.
Thou art resolved?
I am resolved.
No, I will rob Tellus ofher weed,
To strew thy greenwith flowers:
the yellows, blues, the purpleviolets, and marigolds,
Shall as a carpet hangupon thy grave,
While summer-days do last.Ay me! poor maid,
Born in a tempest, when mymother died,
This world to me is like alasting storm,
Whirring me from myfriends.
How now, Marina! why doyou keep alone?
How chance my daughteris not with you?
Do not consume yourblood with sorrowing:
What, have you a nurse of me.Lord, how your favour's changed
With this unprofitablewoe!
Come, give me yourflowers, On the sea march'nt.
Walk with Leonine; the airis quick there,
And it pierces andsharpens the stomach.
Come Leonine, take her bythe arm, walk with her.
No, I pray you;
I'll not bereave you ofyour servant.
Come, come;
I love the king yourfather, and yourself,
With more than foreignheart. We every day
Expect him here: when heshall come and see
Our paragon to all reportsthus blasted,
He will repent the breadthof his great voyage;
Blame both my lord and me,that we have taken
No care to your bestcourses. Go, I pray you,
Walk, and be cheerfulonce again;
reserve that excellentcomplexion, which did steal
The eyes of young andold. Care not for me
I can go home alone.
Well, I will go;
But yet I have no desireto it.
Come, come, I know 'tisgood for you.
Walk half an hour,Leonine, at the least:
Remember what I have said.
I warrant you, madam.
I'll leave you, my sweetlady, for a while:
Pray, walk softly, do notheat your blood:
What! I must have careof you.
My thanks, sweet madam.
Is this wind westerly thatblows?
South-west.
When I was born, the windwas north.
Was't so?
My father, as nurse said,did never fear,
But cried 'Good seaman!'to the sailors, galling
His kingly hands, halingropes;
And, clasping to the mast,endured a sea
That almost burst thedeck.
When was this?
When I was born:
Never was wind nor wavesmore violent;
And from the ladder-tacklewashes off a canvas-climber.
'Ha!' says one, 'wilt out?'
And with a droppingindustry they skip
From stem to stern: theboatswain whistles,
and the master calls, andtrebles their confusion.
Come, say your prayers.
What mean you?
If you require a littlespace for prayer,
I grant it: pray; but benot tedious,
For the gods are quick ofear, and I am sworn
To do my work with haste.
Why will you kill me?
To satisfy my lady.
Why would she have mekill'd?
Now, as I can remember, bymy troth,
I never did her hurt inall my life:
I never spake bad word,nor did ill turn
To any living creature:believe me, la,
I never kill'd a mouse,nor hurt a fly:
I trod upon a worm againstmy will,
But I wept for it. Howhave I offended,
Wherein my death mightyield her any profit,
Or my life imply her anydanger?
My commission Is not to reasonof the deed, but do it.
You will not do't for allthe world, I hope.
You are well favour'd, andyour looks foreshow
You have a gentle heart. Isaw you lately,
When you caught hurt inparting two that fought:
Good sooth, it show'd wellin you: do so now:
Your lady seeks my life;come you between,
And save poor me, theweaker.
I am sworn,
And will dispatch.
Hold, villain!
A prize! a prize!
Half-part, mates,half-part.
Come, let's have heraboard suddenly.
These roguing thieves servethe great pirate Valdes;
And they have seizedMarina. Let her go:
There's no hopeshe will return.
I'll swear she's dead,
And thrown into the sea.But I'll see further:
Perhaps they will butplease themselves upon her,
Not carry her aboard. Ifshe remain,
Whom they have ravish'dmust by me be slain.
Boult!
Sir?
Search the market narrowly;Mytilene is full of gallants.
We lost too much money thismart by being too wenchless.
We were never so muchout of creatures.
We have but poor three,
and they can do no morethan they can do;
and they with continual actionare even as good as rotten.
Therefore let's have fresh ones,whate'er we pay for them.
If there be not a conscienceto be used in every trade,
we shall never prosper.
Thou sayest true: 'tis not ourbringing up of poor bastards,
--as, I think, I havebrought up some eleven--
Ay, to eleven; andbrought them down again.
But shall I search the market?
What else, man? The stuffwe have, a strong wind
will blow it to pieces, theyare so pitifully sodden.
Thou sayest true; they're toounwholesome, o' conscience.
The poor Transylvanian is dead,
that lay with thelittle baggage.
Ay, she quickly pooped him; shemade him roast-meat for worms.
But I'll go search the market.
Three or four thousandchequins were as pretty a
proportion to livequietly, and so give over.
Why to give over, I prayyou? is it a shame to get
when we are old?
O, our credit comes notin like the commodity,
nor the commodity wagesnot with the danger:
therefore, if in ouryouths we could pick up
some pretty estate, 'twere notamiss to keep our door hatched.
Besides, the sore terms westand upon with the gods
will be strong with us forgiving over.
Come, other sorts offendas well as we.
As well as we! ay, andbetter too; we offend worse.
Neither is ourprofession any trade;
it's no calling. Buthere comes Boult.
Come your ways. My masters,you say she's a virgin?
O, sir, we doubt it not.
Master, I have gone throughfor this piece, you see:
if you like her, so; if not,I have lost my earnest.
Boult, has she anyqualities?
She has a goodface, speaks well,
and has excellent good clothes:there's no further necessity
of qualities can makeher be refused.
What's her price, Boult?
I cannot be bated one doitof a thousand pieces.
Well, follow me, my masters,
you shall have yourmoney presently.
Wife, take her in; instructher what she has to do,
that she may not be rawin her entertainment.
Boult, take you the marks ofher, the colour of her hair,
complexion, height, age, withwarrant of her virginity;
and cry 'He that willgive most shall
have her first.' Such amaidenhead were no cheap thing,
if men were as they have been.
Get this done as I command you.
Performance shall follow.
Alack that Leonine was soslack, so slow!
He should have struck, notspoke; or that these pirates,
Not enough barbarous, hadnot o'erboard thrown me
For to seek my mother!
Why lament you, prettyone?
That I am pretty.
Come, the gods have donetheir part in you.
I accuse them not.
You are light into my hands,where you are like to live.
The more my faultTo scape his hands
where I was like to die.
Ay, and you shall live inpleasure.
No.
Yes, indeed shall you, and tastegentlemen of all fashions:
you shall fare well;you shall have the
difference of all complexions.What! do you stop your ears?
Are you a woman?
What would you have me be,an I be not a woman?
An honest woman, or not awoman.
Marry, whip thee, gosling:I think I shall have
something to do with you. Come,you're a young foolish sapling,
and must be bowed asI would have you.
The gods defend me!
If it please the godsto defend you by men,
then men must comfortyou, men must feed you,
men to stir you up.
Boult's returned.
How now, sir, hast thou criedher through the market?
I have cried her almost tothe number of her hairs;
I have drawn her picturewith my voice.
And I prithee tell me, how dostthou find the inclination
of the people, especiallyof the younger sort?
'Faith, they listened tome as they would have
hearkened to theirfather's testament.
There was a Spaniard'smouth so watered,
that he went to bed toher very description.
We shall have himhere to-morrow
with his best ruff on.
To-night, to-night.But, mistress,
Do you know the French knightthat cowers i' the hams?
Who, Monsieur Veroles?
Ay, he: he offered to cut acaper at the proclamation;
but he made a groanat it, and swore
he would see herto-morrow.
Well, well; as for him, hebrought his disease hither:
here he does but repair it.
I know he will comein our shadow,
to scatter hiscrowns in the sun.
Well, if we had of everynation a traveller,
we should lodge themwith this sign.
Pray you, come hither awhile.
You have fortunes comingupon you. Mark me:
you must seem todo that fearfully
which you commit willingly,
despise profit whereyou have most gain.
To weep that you live as ye domakes pity in your lovers:
seldom but that pity begetsyou a good opinion,
and that opinion a mereprofit. I understand you not.
O, take her home,mistress, take her home:
these blushes of hersmust be quenched
with some present practise.
Thou sayest true, i'faith;
for your bride goesto that with shame
which is her way togo with warrant.
'Faith, some do, and somedo not. But, mistress,
if I have bargainedfor the joint,--
Thou mayst cut a morseloff the spit.
I may so.
Who should deny it? Come,young one, I like the
manner of your garmentswell.
Ay, by my faith, theyshall not be changed yet.
Boult, spend thou that inthe town: report what a
sojourner we have; you'lllose nothing by custom.
When nature flamed this piece,
she meant thee a good turn;
therefore say whata paragon she is,
and thou hast the harvestout of thine own report.
I warrant you, mistress,thunder shall not so awake
the beds of eels as mygiving out her beauty
stir up the lewdly-inclined.I'll bring home some to-night.
Come your ways; follow me.
If fires be hot, knivessharp, or waters deep,
Untied I still my virginknot will keep.
Diana, aid my purpose!
What have we to do with Diana?
Pray you, will you go with us?
Why, are you foolish? Canit be undone?
O Dionyza, such a piece ofslaughter
The sun and moon ne'erlook'd upon!
I think you'll turna child again.
Were I chief lord of allthis spacious world,
I'ld give it to undo thedeed. O lady,
Much less in blood thanvirtue, yet a princess
To equal any single crowno' the earth
I' the justice of compare!O villain Leonine!
Whom thou hast poison'dtoo:
If thou hadst drunk to him,'t had been a kindness
Becoming well thy fact:what canst thou say
When noble Pericles shalldemand his child?
That she is dead. Nursesare not the fates,
To foster it, nor ever topreserve.
She died at night; I'llsay so. Who can cross it?
Unless you play the piousinnocent,
And for an honestattribute cry out
'She died by foul play.'
O, go to. Well, well,
Of all the faultsbeneath the heavens,
The gods do like this worst.
Be one of those that think
The petty wrens of Tarsuswill fly hence,
And open this to Pericles.
I shame to think of whata noble strain you are,
And of how coward aspirit.
To such proceeding
Who ever but hisapprobation gave,
And not his prime consent,
he did not flow fromhonourable sources.
Be it so, then:
Yet none does know, butyou, how she came dead,
Nor none can know, Leoninebeing gone.
She did disdain my child,and stood between
Her and her fortunes: nonewould look on her,
But cast their gazes onMarina's face;
Whilst ours was blurted atand held a malkin
Not worth the time of day.It pierced me through;
And though you call mycourse unnatural,
You not your child wellloving, yet I find
It greets me as anenterprise of kindness
Perform'd to your soledaughter.
Heavens forgive it!
And as for Pericles,
What should he say? Wewept after her hearse,
And yet we mourn: hermonument
Is almost finish'd, andher epitaphs
In glittering goldencharacters express
A general praise to her,and care in us
At whose expense 'tisdone.
Thou art like the harpy,
Which, to betray, dost,with thine angel's face,
Seize with thine eagle'stalons.
You are like one thatsuperstitiously
Do swear to the gods thatwinter kills the flies:
But yet I know you'll doas I advise.
Thus time we waste, andlong leagues make short;
Sail seas in cockles, havean wish but for't;
Making, to take yourimagination,
From bourn to bourn,region to region.
Where our scenes seem tolive. I do beseech you
To learn of me, who standi' the gaps to teach you,
The stages of our story.
Pericles is now againthwarting the wayward seas,
Attended on by many a lordand knight.
To see his daughter, allhis life's delight.
Old Helicanus goes along.
Behind is left to govern, if you bear in mind,
Old Escanes, whom Helicanus late
Advanced in time togreat and high estate,
Well-sailing ships andbounteous winds have brought
This king to Tarsus,--thinkhis pilot thought;
So with his steerage shallyour thoughts grow on,--
To fetch his daughterhome, who first is gone.
Like motes and shadows seethem move awhile;
Your ears unto your eyesI'll reconcile.
See how belief may sufferby foul show!
This borrow'd passionstands for true old woe;
And Pericles, in sorrowall devour'd,
With sighs shot through, andbiggest tears o'ershower'd,
Leaves Tarsus and againembarks. He swears
Never to wash his face,nor cut his hairs:
He puts on sackcloth, andto sea. He bears
A tempest, which hismortal vessel tears,
And yet he rides it out.Now please you wit.
The epitaph is for Marinawrit by wicked Dionyza.
'The fairest, sweet'st,and best lies here,
Who wither'd in her springof year.
She was of Tyrus theking's daughter,
On whom foul death hathmade this slaughter;
Marina was she call'd; andat her birth,
The sea, being proud, swallow'dsome part o' the earth:
Therefore the earth,fearing to be o'erflow'd,
Hath The seas' birth-childon the heavens bestow'd:
Wherefore she does, andswears she'll never stint,
Make raging battery uponshores of flint.'
No visor does become blackvillany
So well as soft and tenderflattery.
Let Pericles believe hisdaughter's dead,
And bear his courses to beordered
By Lady Fortune; while ourscene must play
His daughter's woe andheavy well-a-day
In her unholy service.Patience, then,
And think you now are allin Mytilene.
Did you ever hear thelike?
No, nor never shall do insuch a place as this,
she being once gone.
But to have divinitypreached there!
did you ever dreamof such a thing?
No, no. Come, I am for nomore bawdy-houses:
shall's go hear thevestals sing?
I'll do any thing nowthat is virtuous;
but I am out of the roadof rutting for ever.
Well, I had rather thantwice the worth of her she
had ne'er come here.
Fie, fie upon her! she'sable to freeze the god
Priapus, and undo awhole generation.
We must either get herravished, or be rid of her.
When she should do for clientsher fitment, and do me the
kindness of our profession,she has me her quirks,
her reasons, her master reasons,her prayers, her knees;
she would make apuritan of the devil,
if he should cheapen akiss of her.
'Faith, I must ravish her,or she'll disfurnish us
of all our cavaliers, andmake our swearers priests.
Now, the pox upon hergreen-sickness for me!
'Faith, there's noway to be rid on't
but by the way to the pox.
Here comes the LordLysimachus disguised.
How now! How a dozen ofvirginities?
Now, the gods to-blessyour honour!
I am glad to see yourhonour in good health.
You may so; 'tis thewell for you that your
resorters stand upon soundlegs. How now!
wholesome iniquity haveyou that a man may deal
withal, and defy thesurgeon?
We have here one, sir, ifshe would--but there never
came her like in Mytilene.
If she'ld but do thedeed of darkness,
thou wouldst say. Your honourknows what 'tis to say
well enough. Well, callforth, call forth.
For flesh and blood, sir,white and red, you shall
see a rose; and she were arose indeed, if she had but--
What, prithee?
O, sir, I can be modest.
That dignifies the renownof a bawd, no less than it
gives a good report to anumber to be chaste.
Here comes that whichgrows to the stalk;
never plucked yet,I can assure you.
Is she not a faircreature?
'Faith, she would serveafter a long voyage at sea.
Well, here's for you:leave us.
I beseech your honour,give me leave: a word, and
I'll have done presently.
I beseech you, do.
First, I would have you note,
this is an honourable man.
I desire to find him so, thatI may worthily note him.
Next, he's the governorof this country,
and a man whom I am bound to.
If he govern the country, youare bound to him indeed;
but how honourable he isin that, I know not.
Pray you, without anymore virginal fencing,
will you use him kindly? He willline your apron with gold.
What he will do graciously,I will thankfully receive.
Ha' you done?
My lord, she's not pacedyet: you must take some
pains to work her to yourmanage. Come, we will
leave his honour and hertogether. Go thy ways.
Now, pretty one, how longhave you been at this trade?
What trade, sir?
Why, I cannot name't but Ishall offend.
I cannot be offended with mytrade. Please you to name it.
How long have you been ofthis profession?
E'er since I can remember.
Did you go to 't so young?Were you a gamester at
five or at seven?
Earlier too, sir, if now Ibe one.
Why, the house you dwellin proclaims you to be a
creature of sale.
Do you know this house tobe a place of such resort,
and will come into 't? Ihear say you are of
honourable parts, and arethe governor of this place.
Why, hath your principal madeknown unto you who I am?
Who is my principal?
Why, your herb-woman; shethat sets seeds and roots
of shame and iniquity. O,you have heard something
of my power, and so standaloof for more serious
wooing. But I protestto thee, pretty one,
my authority shall not seethee, or else look friendly
upon thee. Come, bring meto some private place:
come, come.
If you were born tohonour, show it now;
If put upon you, make thejudgment good
That thought you worthy ofit.
How's this? how's this?Some more; be sage.
What reason is therein your justice
which hath power over all toundo any?
Take you mine honour and youmake a gap into fobidden ground
Where after all may tread.If then with violence
you mar this workmanshipof heaven
you will abuse yourjustice, kill you honour
and leave me impoverishedto the world.
Why this same housewherein thou live'st
is a receptacle ofall men's sins.
A nurse of wickedness. Howcan'st thou be anything
but naught that dwells within?
Know you the roof butstill will enter here?
Oh my good lord, ifthere be fire before me
must I straightway run to burnmyself
or suppose this house,which two too many
feels such houses are shouldbe the doctor's patromony
and the surgeons feeding,follows it that I must needs
infect myself to maintain them.
My yet good lord,make me your servant
and I will obey you.Let me live honest
and I am content. Honest.
How now, even in thisminute let me die.
O, that the gods
Would set me free fromthis unhallow'd place,
Though they did change meto the meanest bird
That flies i' the purerair!
Now surely this is virtue'simage rather virtue's self.
Come down from heavenawhile to reign on earth
to teach us what we should be.
I did not think thou couldsthave spoke so well;
ne'er dream'd thou couldst.
I hither came with thoughtsintemperate, foul and deformed.
The which your tears havewashed, till they are white.
Your speech has mended mycorrupted mind.
Hold, here's gold for thee:
Persever in that clear waythou goest,
And the gods strengthenthee!
The good gods preserveyou!
Lady, to me the very doors andwindows savour vilely.
Fare thee well. Thouart a piece of virtue,
and I doubt not but thytraining hath been noble.
Hold, here's more gold forthee.
A curse upon him, die helike a thief,
That robs thee of thy goodness!
If thou dost hear from me,it shall be for thy good.
I beseech your honour, onepiece for me.
Avaunt, thou damneddoor-keeper!
Your house, but for thisvirgin that doth prop it,
Would sink and overwhelmyou. Away!
How's this? We must takeanother course with you.
If your peevish chastity,which is not worth a
breakfast in the cheapestcountry under the cope,
shall undo a whole household,let me be gelded like
a spaniel. Come your ways.
Whither would you have me?
How now! what's thematter?
Worse and worse, mistress;she has here spoken holy
words to the LordLysimachus.
O abominable!
She makes our professionas it were to stink afore
the face of the gods.
Marry, hang her up forever!
The nobleman would havedealt with her like a
nobleman, and she sent himaway as cold as a snowball;
saying his prayers too.
Boult, take her away; useher at thy pleasure:
crack the glass ofher virginity,
and make the rest malleable.
An if she were thornierground than she is,
she shall be ploughed.
Hark, hark, you gods!
She conjures: away withher! Would she had never
come within my doors!Marry, hang you!
She's born to undo us. Will younot go the way of women-kind?
Marry, come up, mydish of chastity
with rosemary and bays!
Come, mistress; I must haveyour maiden head taken off
or the common hangmanshall execute it.
Come your ways. We'll have nomore gentlemen driven away.
Come your ways, I say!
Whither wilt thou have me?
To take from you the jewelyou hold so dear.
Prithee, tell me one thingfirst.
Come now, your one thing.
Who does thou think thineenemy to be?
Why, I could wish him to be mymaster, or rather, my mistress.
Neither of these are sobad as thou art,
Since they do better theein their command.
Thou hold'st a place, forwhich the pained'st fiend
Of hell would not inreputation change:
Thou art the damneddoorkeeper to every
Coistrel that comesinquiring for his Tib;
To the choleric fisting ofevery rogue
Thy ear is liable; thyfood is such
As hath been belch'd on byinfected lungs.
What would you have me do?go to the wars, would you?
Where a man may serveseven years for the loss
of a leg, and havenot money enough
to buy him a wooden one?
Do any thing butthis thou doest.
Empty old receptacles, orcommon shores, of filth;
Serve by indenture to thecommon hangman:
Any of these ways are yetbetter than this;
For what thou professest,a baboon, could he speak,
Would own a name too dear.O, that the gods
Would safely deliver mefrom this place!
Here, here's gold forthee.
If that thy master wouldgain by thee,
Proclaim that I can sing,weave, sew, and dance,
With other virtues, whichI'll keep from boast:
And I will undertake allthese to teach.
I doubt not but thispopulous city will
Yield many scholars.
But can you teach all thisyou speak of?
Prove that I cannot, takeme home again,
And prostitute me to thebasest groom
That doth frequent yourhouse.
Well, I will see whatI can do for thee:
if I can place thee, I will.
But amongst honest women.
'Faith, my acquaintancelies little amongst them.
But since my master andmistress have bought you,
there's no going butby their consent:
therefore I will make themacquainted with your purpose,
and I doubt not but I shallfind them tractable enough.
Come, I'll do for thee whatI can; come your ways.
Marina thus the brothel'scapes, and enters
Into an honest house, ourstory says.
She sings like oneimmortal, and she dances
As goddess-like to heradmired lays;
Deep clerks she dumbs; andwith her needle composes
Nature's own shape, of bud,bird, branch, and berry,
That even her art sistersthe natural roses;
Her inkle, silk, twin withthe rubied cherry:
That pupils lacks she noneof noble race,
Who pour their bounty onher; and her gain
She gives the cursed bawd.Here we her place;
And to her father turn ourminds again,
Where we left him, on thesea. We there him lost;
Whence, driven before thewinds, he is arrived
Here where his daughterdwells; and on this coast
Suppose him now at anchor.The city strived
God Neptune's annual feastto keep: from whence
Lysimachus our Tyrian shipespies,
His banners sable, trimm'dwith rich expense;
And to him in his bargewith fervor hies.
Where is lord Helicanus?
he can resolve you.
O, here he is.
Sir, there's a barge putoff from Mytilene,
And in it is Lysimachusthe governor,
Who craves to come aboard.What is your will?
That he have his. Call upsome gentlemen.
Ho, gentlemen! my lordcalls.
Gentlemen, there's some ofworth would come aboard;
I pray ye, greet themfairly.
Sir,
This is the man that can, inaught you would, resolve you.
Hail, reverend sir! thegods preserve you!
And you, sir, to outlivethe age I am,
And die as I would do.
You wish me well.
Being on shore, honouringof Neptune's triumphs,
Seeing this goodly vesselride before us,
I made to it, to know ofwhence you are.
First, what is your place?
I am the governor of thisplace you lie before.
Sir,
Our vessel is of Tyre, init the king;
A man who for this threemonths hath not spoken
To any one, nor takensustenance
But to prorogue his grief.
Upon what ground is hisdistemperature?
'Twould be too tedious torepeat;
But the main grief springsfrom the loss
Of a beloved daughter anda wife.
May we not see him?
You may;
But bootless is your sight:he will not speak to any.
Yet let me obtain my wish.
Behold him.
This was a goodly person,
Till the disaster that,one mortal night,
Drove him to this.
Sir king, all hail!
Hail, royal sir!
The god's preserve you.
It is in vain; he will notspeak to you.
Sir,
We have a maid inMytilene, I durst wager,
Would win some words ofhim.
'Tis well bethought.
She questionless with hersweet harmony
And other chosenattractions, would allure,
And make a battery throughhis deafen'd parts,
Which now are midwaystopp'd:
She is all happy as thefairest of all,
And, with her fellow maidsis now upon
The leafy shelter thatabuts against
The island's side.
Sure, all's effectless;yet nothing we'll omit
That bears recovery's name.But, since your kindness
We have stretch'd thusfar, let us beseech you
That for our gold we mayprovision have,
Wherein we are notdestitute for want,
But weary for thestaleness.
O, sir, a courtesy
Which if we should deny,the most just gods
For every graff would senda caterpillar,
And so afflict ourprovince. Yet once more
Let me entreat to know atlarge the cause
Of your king's sorrow.
Sit, sir, I will recountit to you:
But, see, I am prevented.
O, here is
The lady that I sent for.Welcome, fair one!
Is't not a goodlypresence?
She's a gallant lady.
She's such a one, that,were I well assured
Came of a gentle kind andnoble stock,
I'ld wish no better choice,and think me rarely wed.
Fair one, all goodnessthat consists in bounty
Expect even here, where isa kingly patient:
If that thy prosperous andartificial feat
Can draw him but to answerthee in aught,
Thy sacred physic shallreceive such pay
As thy desires can wish.
Sir, I will use
My utmost skillin his recovery,
Provided that none but Iand my companion maid
Be suffer'd to come nearhim.
Come, let us leave her;
And the gods make herprosperous!
♪ sings
Mark'd he your music?
No, nor look'd on us.
See, she will speak tohim.
Hail, sir! my lord, lendear.
I am a maid,
My lord, that ne'er beforeinvited eyes,
But have been gazed onlike a comet: she speaks,
My lord, that, may be,hath endured a grief
Might equal yours, if bothwere justly weigh'd.
Though wayward fortune didmalign my state,
My derivation was fromancestors
Who stood equivalent withmighty kings:
But time hath rooted outmy parentage,
And to the world andawkward casualties
Bound me in servitude.
I will desist;
But there is somethingglows upon my cheek,
And whispers in mine ear,'Go not till he speak.'
My fortunes--parentage--goodparentage--
To equal mine!--was it notthus? what say you?
I said, my lord, if youdid know my parentage,
You would not do meviolence.
I do think so. Pray you,turn your eyes upon me.
You are like somethingthat--What country-woman?
Here of these shores?
No, nor of any shores:
Yet I was mortally broughtforth, and am
No other than I appear.
I am great with woe, andshall deliver weeping.
My dearest wife was likethis maid, and such a one
My daughter might have been:my queen's square brows;
Her stature to an inch; aswand-like straight;
As silver-voiced; her eyesas jewel-like
And cased as richly; inpace another Juno;
Who starves the ears shefeeds, and makes them hungry,
The more she gives themspeech. Where do you live?
Where I am but a stranger:
From the deck you maydiscern the place.
Where were you bred?
And how achieved you theseendowments, which
You make more rich to owe?
If I should tell myhistory, it would seem
Like lies disdain'd in thereporting.
Prithee, speak:
Falseness cannot come fromthee; for thou look'st
Modest as Justice, andthou seem'st a palace
For the crown'd Truth to dwellin: I will believe thee,
And make my senses creditthy relation
To points that seemimpossible; for thou look'st
Like one I loved indeed.What were thy friends?
Didst thou not say, when Idid push thee back--
Which was when I perceivedthee--that thou camest
From good descending?
So indeed I did.
Report thy parentage. Ithink thou said'st
Thou hadst been toss'dfrom wrong to injury,
And that thou thought'st thygriefs might equal mine,
If both were open'd.
Some such thing
I said, and said no morebut what my thoughts
Did warrant me was likely.
Tell thy story;
If thine consider'd provethe thousandth part
Of my endurance, thou arta man, and I
Have suffer'd like a girl:yet thou dost look
Like Patience gazing onkings' graves, and smiling
Extremity out of act. Whatwere thy friends?
How lost thou them? Thyname, my most kind virgin?
Recount, I do beseechthee: come, sit by me.
My name is Marina.
O, I am mock'd,
And thou by some incensedgod sent hither
To make the world to laughat me.
Patience, good sir,
Or here I'll cease.
Nay, I'll be patient.
Thou little know'st howthou dost startle me,
To call thyself Marina.
The name was given me byone that had some power,
My father, and a king.
How! a king's daughter?
And call'd Marina?
You said you would believeme;
But, not to be a troubler ofyour peace, I will end here.
But are you flesh andblood?
Have you a working pulse?and are no fairy?
Motion! Well; speak on.Where were you born?
And wherefore call'dMarina?
Call'd Marina For Iwas born at sea.
At sea! what mother?
My mother was the daughterof a king;
Who died the minute I wasborn,
As my good nurse Lychoridahath oft
Deliver'd weeping.
O, stop there a little!
This is the rarest dreamthat e'er dull sleep
Did mock sad fools withal:this cannot be:
My daughter's buried.Well: where were you bred?
I'll hear you more, to thebottom of your story,
And never interrupt you.
You scorn: believe me,'twere best I did give o'er.
I will believe you by thesyllable
Of what you shall deliver.Yet, give me leave:
How came you in theseparts? where were you bred?
The king my father did inTarsus leave me;
Till cruel Cleon, with hiswicked wife,
Did seek to murder me: andhaving woo'd
A villain to attempt it,who having drawn to do't,
A crew of pirates came andrescued me;
Brought me to Mytilene.But, good sir,
Whither will you have me?Why do you weep?
It may be, You thinkme an impostor:
no, good faith;
I am the daughter to KingPericles,
If good King Pericles be.
Ho, Helicanus!
Calls my lord?
Thou art a grave and noblecounsellor,
Most wise in general: tellme, if thou canst,
What this maid is, or whatis like to be,
That thus hath made meweep?
I know not; but
Here is the regent, sir,of Mytilene
Speaks nobly of her.
She would never tell
Her parentage; beingdemanded that,
She would sit still andweep.
O Helicanus, strike me,royal'd sir;
Give me a gash, put me topresent pain;
Lest this great sea ofjoys rushing upon me
O'erbear the shores of mymortality,
And drown me with theirsweetness. O, come hither,
Thou that beget'st himthat did thee beget;
Thou that wast born atsea, buried at Tarsus,
And found at sea again! OHelicanus,
Down on thy knees, thankthe holy gods as loud
As thunder threatens us:this is Marina.
What was thy mother'sname? tell me but that,
For truth can never beconfirm'd enough,
Though doubts did eversleep.
First, sir, I pray,
What is your title?
I am Pericles of Tyre: buttell me now
My drown'd queen's name,as in the rest you said
Thou hast been godlikeperfect,
The heir of kingdoms andanother like
To Pericles thy father.
Is it no more to be yourdaughter than
To say my mother's namewas Thaisa?
Thaisa was my mother, whodid end
The minute I began.
Now, blessing on thee!rise; thou art my child.
Give me fresh garments.Mine own, Helicanus;
She is not dead at Tarsus,as she should have been,
By savage Cleon: she shalltell thee all;
When thou shalt kneel, andjustify in knowledge
She is thy very princess.Who is this?
Sir, 'tis the governor ofMytilene,
Who, hearing of yourmelancholy state,
Did come to see you.
I embrace you.
Give me my robes. I amwild in my beholding.
O heavens bless my girl!But, hark, what music?
Tell Helicanus, my Marina,tell him
O'er, point by point, foryet he seems to doubt,
How sure you are mydaughter. But, what music?
(♪ music)
My lord, I hear none.
None!
The music of the spheres!List, my Marina.
It is not good to crosshim; give him way.
Rarest sounds! Do ye nothear?
Music, my lord, I hear.
Most heavenly music!
It nips me unto listening,and thick slumber
Hangs upon mine eyes: letme rest.
A pillow for his head:
So, leave him.
Well, mycompanion friends,
If this but answer to myjust belief,
I'll well remember you.
My temple stands inEphesus: hie thee thither,
And do upon mine altarsacrifice.
There, when my maidenpriests are met together,
Before the people all,
Reveal how thou at seadidst lose thy wife:
To mourn thy crosses, withthy daughter's, call
And give them repetitionto the life.
Perform my bidding, orthou livest in woe;
Do it, and happy; by mysilver bow!
Awake, and tell thy dream.
Celestial Dian, goddessargentine,
I will obey thee.
Helicanus!
Sir?
My purpose was for Tarsus,there to strike
The inhospitable Cleon;but I am
For other service first:toward Ephesus
Turn our blown sails;eftsoons I'll tell thee why.
Shall we refresh us, sir,upon your shore,
And give you gold for suchprovision
As our intents will need?
Sir, With all my heart;and, when you come ashore,
I have another suit.
You shall prevail,
Were it to woo mydaughter; for it seems
You have been nobletowards her.
Sir, lend me your arm.
Come, my Marina.
Now our sands are almostrun;
More a little, and thendumb.
This, my last boon, giveme,
For such kindness mustrelieve me,
That you aptly willsuppose
What pageantry, whatfeats, what shows,
What minstrelsy, andpretty din,
The regent made inMytilene
To greet the king. So hethrived,
That he is promised to bewived
To fair Marina; but in nowise
Till he had done hissacrifice,
As Dian bade: wheretobeing bound,
The interim, pray you, allconfound.
In feather'd briefnesssails are fill'd,
And wishes fall out asthey're will'd.
At Ephesus, the templesee,
Our king and all hiscompany.
That he can hither come sosoon,
Is by your fancy'sthankful doom.
Hail, Dian! to perform thyjust command,
I here confess myself theking of Tyre;
Who, frighted from mycountry, did wed
At Pentapolis the fairThaisa.
At sea in childbed diedshe, but brought forth
A maid-child call'dMarina; who, O goddess,
Wears yet thy silverlivery. She at Tarsus
Was nursed with Cleon; whoat sixteen years
He sought to murder: buther better stars
Brought her to Mytilene;'gainst whose shore
Riding, her fortunesbrought the maid aboard us,
Where, by her own mostclear remembrance, she
Made known herself mydaughter.
Voice and favour!
You are, you are--O royalPericles!
She dies! help, gentlemen!
To the lady.
Noble sir,
If you have told Diana'saltar true,
This is your wife.
Reverend appearer, no;
I threw her overboard withthese very arms.
Upon this coast, I warrantyou.
'Tis most certain.
O, she's but o'erjoy'd.
Early one blustering mornthis lady was
Thrown upon this shore. Ioped the coffin,
Found her richjewels; recover'd her,
and placed her herein Diana's temple.
May we see them?
Great sir, they shall bebrought you to my house,
Whither I invite you.Look, Thaisa is recovered.
O, let me look!
If he be none of mine, mysanctity
Will to my sense bend nolicentious ear,
But curb it, spite ofseeing. O, my lord,
Are you not Pericles? Likehim you spake,
Like him you are: did younot name a tempest,
A birth, and death?
The voice of dead Thaisa!
That Thaisa am I, supposeddead
And drown'd.
Immortal Dian!
Now I know you better.
When we with tears partedPentapolis,
The king my father gaveyou such a ring.
This, this: no more, yougods! your present kindness
Makes my past miseriessports: you shall do well,
That on the touching ofher lips I may
Melt and no more be seen.O, come, be buried
A second time within thesearms.
My heart Leaps to be goneinto my mother's bosom.
Look, who kneels here!Flesh of thy flesh, Thaisa;
Thy burden at the sea, andcall'd Marina
For she was yielded there.
Blest, and mine own!
Hail, madam, and my queen!
I know you not.
You have heard me say,when I did fly from Tyre,
I left behind an ancientsubstitute:
Can you remember what Icall'd the man?
I have named him oft.
'Twas Helicanus then.
Still confirmation:
Embrace him, dear Thaisa;this is he.
Now do I long to hear howyou were found;
How possibly preserved;and who to thank,
Besides the gods, for thisgreat miracle.
Lord Cerimon, my lord;this man,
Through whom the gods haveshown their power; that can
From first to last resolveyou.
Reverend sir,
The gods can have nomortal officer
More like a god than you.Will you deliver
How this dead queenre-lives?
I will, my lord.
Beseech you, first go withme to my house,
Where shall be shown youall was found with her;
How she came placed herein the temple;
No needful thing omitted.
Pure Dian, I bless thee forthy vision!
And will offernight-oblations to thee.
Thaisa, This prince,
the fair-betrothedof your daughter,
Shall marry her atPentapolis. And now,
This ornament
Makes me look dismal willI clip to form;
And what these many years norazor touch'd,
To grace thy marriage-day,I'll beautify.
Lord Cerimon hath lettersof good credit, sir,
My father's dead.
Heavens make a star ofhim! Yet there, my queen,
We'll celebrate theirnuptials, and ourselves
Will in that kingdom spendour following days:
Our son and daughter shallin Tyrus reign.
Lord Cerimon, we do ourlonging stay
To hear the rest untold:sir, lead's the way.
In Antiochus and hisdaughter you have heard
Of monstrous lust the dueand just reward:
In Pericles, his queen anddaughter, seen,
Although assail'd withfortune fierce and keen,
Virtue preserved from felldestruction's blast,
Led on by heaven, andcrown'd with joy at last:
In Helicanus may you welldescry
A figure of truth, offaith, of loyalty:
In reverend Cerimon therewell appears
The worth that learnedcharity aye wears:
For wicked Cleon and hiswife, when fame
Had spread their curseddeed, and honour'd name
Of Pericles, to rage thecity turn,
That he and his they inhis palace burn;
The gods for murder seemedso content
To punish; althoughnot done, but meant.
So, on your patienceevermore attending,
New joy wait on you! Hereour play has ending.